The earlier ages of the church seem to have been distinguished by a love which made all christians regard themselves as members of one family. The saying of our Lord “By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another,” appears to have been successfully taken as furnishing their rule of conduct; for “See how these christians love one another was the common remark of enemies and persecutors.


And the observable thing is, that of which we speak was the love of christians as christians, irrespective altogether of other claims upon affection. The moment a man embraced christianity, he was regard as a brother, and felt to be a brother, by the whole christian body: a thousand hearts at once beat kindly towards him; and multitudes, who were never likely to see him in the flesh, were instantly one with him spirit. It may admit of great doubt whether there be much, in our own day, of that which thus distinguished the beginning of christianity. The love of christians because they are christians, no regard being had to country or condition - is this still a strongly marked characteristic of those who profess themselves the disciples of the Redeemer? There was something very touching and beautiful in Christ's promise to such as should forsake all for his sake: “There is no man that left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospel's, but he shall receive a hundred-fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands.” How was such a promise fulfilled, except that they, who had been cast out for their religion from their own families and possessions, found themselves admitted at once into a new household, and endowed with new property, even the household and the property of the whole christian community? For every natural relation whom they had lost, they obtained instantly a hundred spiritual; and the goods of which they had been spoiled, returned to them, a thousand-fold multiplied, in the possessions of those who received them as children and brethren. Thus was strikingly verified a description long before given of God by the Psalmist: “He setteth the solitary in families” - for they who were to all appearance abandoned, left orphaned and alone in the world, found themselves surrounded by kinsmen.


But it is only we fear, in a very limited sense, that the like can be affirmed of the christians of our own day. Yet the criterion of genuine christianity remains just what it was: “We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren: he that loveth not his brother abideth in death.” In our own time the ends of the earth are being wondrously brought together: there is an ever-growing facility of communication between country and country; and this must rapidly break down many barriers and bring far scattered tribes into familiar intercourse. In earlier times, nation was widely divided from nation: the inhabitants of different lands were necessarily almost strangers to each other; and you could not have expected an approximation to universal brotherhood. But then it was, in the face of all obstacles to personal communion, that the spirit of christianity showed its comprehensive and amalgamating energies: the name of Christ was as a spell to annihilate distance; to plant the cross in a land, sufficed to make that land one with districts removed from it by the diameter of the globe. Alas for the colder temper of modern times! We have made paths across the waters, we have exalted the valleys, we have brought low the hills, so that we can visit every region, and scarce seem to leave our home; but where is that glowing and ample charity, which would throb towards christians whom we have never seen, and make us feel that our own household includes the far off and the near, all who worship the same God, and trust in the same Mediator?


We have been led into these remarks, from observing, in the apostolical writings, the affectionate greetings which the members of one church send to those of another. For the most part, these churches had no intercourse the one with the other; they were widely separated by situation; and, had it not been for the bond of a common faith, their members would have been as much strangers as though they had belonged to different orders of being. And yet you would judge, from the warm remembrances, the kindly messages, which pass between them, that they were associated by most intimate relationship, that they were friends who had spent years together, or kinsmen who had been brought up beneath the same roof. When St. Paul wrote thus to the Colossians, “For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as as have not seen my face in the flesh,” you would have thought, from the energy of his expressions, that it must have been for some dear and long-tried acquaintance that he was thus deeply interested, had he not immediately described the objects of his solicitude, as those who had not seen his face in flesh. And, in like manner, when you read the salutations sent by one church to another, the warm and cordial greetings, you would conclude that these churches had held familiar intercourse, that their members had conversed much together, and mingled in the intimacies of life, if you did not know, from other sources of information, that they were all strangers to each other, except as all belonging to Christ's mystical body. So strong a link of association was christianity then felt to be! Christians knew that there were christians in distant lands, whom they were never likely to visit, and who were never likely to visit them - but what mattered it, that they were not to see one another in the flesh? They were grafted into the same vine, they were washed in the same blood, they were quickened by the same Spirit; and feeling, therefore, as though one mother had born them, and one home sheltered them, they poured forth hearty salutations, and multiplied expressions of the very tenderest affection.


It was thus with the Romans the Philippians. They were widely removed the one from the other; and probably there had been little or no intercourse between the members of the churches. Yet you find, from our text, that the christians at Rome felt kindly towards the christians at Philippi, and charged St. Paul with their sentiments of esteem and good-will. “All the saints salute you” - not, you observe, a few of the most distinguished, of those who had advanced farthest in the charity enjoined by the Gospel - but “all the saints salute you.” O blessed estate of a Christian Church, when every member had a cordial greeting to send to persons whom he had never beheld, but whom he loved, as loving the Savior with himself.


You will, however, naturally suppose that we selected our present text not so much as containing the general salutation of one church by another, as on account of its marking out certain individuals as specially earnest in their greetings. “All the saints salute you; chiefly, they that are of Cæsar's household.” There was a friendly salutation from all the members of the Roman Church; but the most friendly issued from those who appertained to the household of Cæsar. And we consider this as an intimation which ought not to be cursorily passed over. We think that truths and lessons of no common interest may be drawn from this brief reference to the christians who were to be found in the imperial circle. We design, therefore, to confine ourselves to the examining this reference, to the endeavoring to discover what it may imply, and what it may enjoin. We are aware, that, at first, it will probably appear to you a barren statement, the announcement of a simple fact, on which no comment is needed, and from which little, if any, instruction can be drawn. But if you would read the Bible with this rule in mind, “All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,” you would find that nothing is stated which could be omitted without loss; and that often, where there is least to strike the superficial reader, there is most to repay the diligent student. Without then further preface, and without proposing any plan of discourse, which might perhaps only impede our inquiries, we ask your attention, whilst endeavoring to show what truths and lessons are furnished by the information that there were saints in the household of Cæsar, and that these were foremost in greeting the saints at Philippi.


Now you are to observe that the throne of the Cæsars was at this time occupied by Nero, a monster rather than a man, whose vices and cruelties will make his name infamous to the very end of the world. Certainly, if ever there was an atmosphere uncongenial to christianity, it may be supposed to have been that of the court and palace of this bloody debauchee. It ordinarily happens that the character of the prince gives the tone to that of his courtiers and attendants; and it would therefore be hardly imaginable that the household of a Nero was not composed in the main of the fierce and dissolute. And it should further be observed, that there was a direct hostility to christianity on the part the emperor; he became eventually a most bitter persecutor of the christians, and St. Paul himself perished by his sword. Where, then, on all human calculation, was there less likelihood of the Gospel gaining footing than in the court and household of Nero? Yet so true was St. Paul's assertion, that the weapons of his warfare were “mighty through God to the casting down of strong-holds,” that there were men of Cæsar's household worthy the high title of saints; men not secretly, but openly, christians; not ashamed of their professions, but willing to give it all publicity by sending greetings to christians in other cities of the earth. And our first inquiry will naturally be, as to the agency which brought round so unlikely a result; how it came to pass, that an entrance was achieved, and a firm footing gained for christianity, where there might have seemed a moral impossibility against its admission, or, at all events, its settlement? Your minds will naturally turn, in answer to this inquiry, to the miraculous gifts with which St. Paul was endowed, to the credentials which he was enabled to furnish of the divine origin of christianity, and to the power and persuasiveness with which he set forth his doctrines. You will remember with what noble intrepidity he rose up before the sages of Greece, and won over even proud philosophy by his reasoning and eloquence; and you will further call to mind, how, when he spake unflinchingly to Felix, the slave of base lusts, the haughty Roman trembled, as though the judgment had already been upon him with its terrors. And while there are these registered achievements of the great Apostle to the Gentiles, you think it quite intelligible that he should have made proselytes even from the household of Nero; you perhaps imagine him working great miracle in order to compel attention of the emperor and his court, and then preaching, with a more than human oratory, the Gospel of Christ, till slumbering consciences were startled, and bold vices abashed.


Indeed you do right in thus ascribing extraordinary power to the miracles and sermons of St. Paul: we could have felt no surprise, supposing this Apostle to have had opportunities of audience, had even Nero trembled like Felix, and had converts been won from the courtiers of Rome, as well as from the philosophers of Athens. But nevertheless, in this instance the explanation utterly fails: St. Paul was now a prisoner, kept in close confinement; and, though allowed to receive who came unto him, was not at liberty, as at other times, to labor openly and vigorously at propagating the Gospel. He could not go, as you have supposed him, like Moses and Aaron, with rod in his hand, and compel by his miracles the attention of a profligate king, and then deliver, in the name of living God, the message of rebuke and the prophecy of vengeance. And yet it was at this very time, when the chief instrument in the diffusion of christianity seemed comparatively disabled, that the great triumph was won, and the imperial household gave members to the church. Nay, and more than this, it appears to have been actually in consequence of his being a prisoner for the faith, rather than a preacher the faith, that St. Paul was instrumental to the obtaining this victory. If you refer to the commencement of this Epistle to the Philippians, you will find the Apostle ascribing to his imprisonment the very result of which we are now seeking the cause. He expresses himself fearful lest the Philippians should have thought that the afflictions with which he had been visited, had impeded the progress of the Gospel. He assures them that quite the contrary effect had been produced: “I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things which have happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel; so that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all other places.” Thus, you see, it was not by his sermons, it was literally by his bonds, that the attention of the court had been attracted to christianity: it was as a captive that he had mastered rulers, and with his chain that he had struck off their fetters. In the following he adds another statement as to the efficaciousness of his bonds: “And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear.” Hence there were two ways, as it would appear, in which bonds gave enlargement to christianity. The patience and meekness with which he submitted to long unjust confinement, drew public attention, and compelled men to feel that, where there was such willingness to suffer, there must be the consciousness of advocating truth. And then the supports and consolations which were ministered to him by God, taught other christians that they could not be losers through intrepidity in preaching the Gospel, and therefore nerved them to greater energy in the work from which Paul himself was temporarily withdrawn. In these ways were the Apostle’s bonds influential; so that when, to all appearance, he was able to do least, when his power of usefulness seemed the most limited, then was that he won admission for christianity into the circle from which you would have thought it most surely excluded.


We cannot but think that a great lesson was thus given, as to God’s power of overruling evil for good, of producing the most signal results when the employed instrumentality appears the least adequate. How apt are we to imagine, when a man is overtaken by sickness, or withdrawn, through one cause or another, from more active duty, that his period of usefulness has closed! How ready are we to lament over what we call a mysterious dispensation, as the Roman christians may have done over the imprisonment of St. Paul! But who shall say that it does not often come to pass, that the minister preaches far more effectually from his sick bed, than ever he did from his pulpit? The report, which goes forth amongst his people, of the patience with which he bore pain, and the calmness with which he met death, will perhaps do more towards overcoming their resistance to the Gospel, than all his energy effected, whilst he gave himself night and day to the bringing them to repentance. Or again, was it whilst they were free to move through a land, and to wrestle boldly with prevailing errors and superstitions, that martyrs and confessors did most for the cause of God and of truth? Was it not rather when they were actually in the clutches of the persecutor, pining in dungeons, or dragged to the scaffold? The flame which consumed them, prevailed most to the scattering the spiritual darkness; and their dust was as seed whence moral verdure sprang. Oh, let no one ever think, that, because unable to exert himself openly and actively, as he once did, for God, he has no duties to perform, no services to render, no rewards to secure. A true christian is never, if we may use a common expression, laid by: God makes use of him in sickness and in health, in life and in death. And the influence which proceeds from him, when languishing on his couch, reduced to poverty, or overwhelmed with affliction, is often incomparably greater than when, in the fulness of his strength, with every engine at his disposal, he moved amongst his fellow-men, and took the lead in each benevolent enterprise. It is on sick-beds that the sustaining power of christianity is most displayed: it is amid multiplied troubles that its professed comforts are put to the proof: it is by dying men that its best promises are shown to have been indeed made by God. And even when the grave has closed upon a righteous man, is it not often true that “he, being dead, yet speaketh?” His memory admonishes and encourages, and that, too, more powerfully than even his living example.


Let no one, then, conclude himself disabled from doing God service, because he can no longer perform active duties, nor take visible part in advancing Christ's kingdom upon earth. Resignation has its victories as well as intrepidity: converts may be made through meekness in trial, as well as through boldness in enterprise. And if we would reconcile ourselves to the apparent suspension of our usefulness; if we would learn that God may be employing us most, when he seems to have most withdrawn us from employment: let us ponder the fact brought before us by our text. I think upon Rome, the metropolis of the world, upon the haughty Cæsars, giving laws to well nigh all the nations of the earth. O that christianity might make way into imperial halls! I should feel as it were indeed about to triumph over heathenism, were it to penetrate the palace of Nero. And then I hear that St. Paul is approaching towards Rome - St. Paul, who has carried the Gospel to the east and west, the north and south, and every where made falsehood quail before truth. My expectations are raised. This great champion of christianity may succeed where there is most to discourage, and gain over Nero's courtiers, if not Nero himself. But then I hear that St. Paul comes as a prisoner: I see him used as a criminal, and debarred from all opportunity of publishing the Gospel to the illustrious and powerful. My hopes are destroyed. The great Apostle seems to me completely disarmed; and the picture which I had fondly drawn of christianity growing dominant through God's blessing on his labors disappears when I behold him detained in captivity. Alas for human short-sightedness and miscalculation! Never again let me dare reckon God’s servants least powerfully, when least visibly instrumental in promoting his cause. St. Paul is a prisoner; St. Paul cannot go boldly to the court, and preach to the mighty; but, in less than two years, he is able to declare, “My bonds are manifest in all the palace,” and to enumerate amongst the saints, who send greetings to the Philippians, “chiefly them that are of Caesar’s household.”


We go on to observe to you - and the observation is of prime importance - that a man cannot be placed in circumstances so disadvantageous to piety as to put it out of his power to give heed to the duties of religion. We have already spoken to you of the character of Nero, and of the profligacy which must have deformed his house-hold and court. We have admitted that, if ever there were an atmosphere uncongenial to christianity, it must have been that of the Roman court, with such an emperor at its head. We could not have been surprised, had the religion of Jesus striven in vain for admission; and it was the little apparent likelihood of there being saints in the household of Cæsar, which suggested the foregoing inquiry as to the instrumentality through which the Gospel succeeded in making these converts. But, nevertheless, the converts were made, and that too, you are carefully to remember, not through any extraordinary agency, seeing that the employed preaching was not that of St. Paul, but only of subordinate ministers. Certainly such an instance as this should show the worthlessness of an excuse with which men would sometimes palliate their neglect of religion - that they are exposed to such temptations, surrounded by such hinderances, or liable to such opposition, that it is vain for them to attempt the great duties of repentance and faith. We challenge any man to show that he is more unfavorably circumstanced than the members of Nero's household must have been. We challenge him to show any likelihood that the profession of religion would expose him to greater dangers, bring on him more obloquy, or cause severer loss, than might have been expected to follow the exchange of heathenism for christianity, by those who bore office in the Roman emperor's court. And whilst we have before us full evidence, that even the servants of Nero could overcome every disadvantage, and “shine as lights” in the church of the Redeemer, we can never admit that the temporal circumstances of any man disqualify him for the being a true christian, or put such obstacles in his way as excuse his not advancing to eminence as a believer.


We readily acknowledge that more appears done for one man than for another; that some circumstances may be said to conduce to the making men pious, whilst others increase the difficulty of separation from the world, and consecration to God. But we can be certain, from the known strength of divine grace, and its sufficiency to all the ends of the renewal and perfecting of our nature, that, under every possible disadvantage, there may be a striving with evil, and a following after good, in obedience to the precepts, and in hope of the recompences, of the Gospel. We will not, at present, discuss whether it be a man's duty, when he feels his circumstances unfavorable to personal religion, to labor to escape from those circumstances; whether the courtier should flee the court where there are incitements to evil, the merchant the traffic which burdens him with cares, or the servant the household where godliness is held contempt. We may find opportunity hereafter of treating this point; we now only say, that the case may often be one in which there is no escape from the circumstances which make piety difficult, and in which the duty of remaining in the disadvantageous position may be as clear as that of struggling against its disadvantages. But we contend that, whensoever such is the case, it is no apology for an individual's continuing void of personal religion, that he would have great difficulties to wrestle with in becoming religious. The individual may fasten on these difficulties, and urge them in excuse, when conscience admonishes him as to the great duties of godliness. But the excuse will not bear investigation; forasmuch as it assumes that God put it out of the man's power to provide for his soul's safety in eternity; and to assume this is to contradict the Divine word, and throw scorn on Divine attributes.


We take for example, the instance most naturally suggested by our text, that of a servant in an irreligious family. We have great sympathy with persons so circumstanced: we count their situation one of no common difficulty. Their superiors set them a bad example, an example of sabbath-breaking, of neglect of all religion, and, perhaps, even of undisguised vice. Few opportunities are afforded them of attending public worship;  and they have but little time for private devotion. If inclined to give heed to religion, they cannot but perceive that any indication of piety would perhaps lose them the favor of their master, and bring upon them the ridicule of their associates. We say again that we have great sympathy with an individual thus situated: we feel that he has more than a common battle to fight, if he stand forth as a candidate for immortality. But there is nothing in his position to make it impracticable that he become truly religious, nor excusable that he defer the season of providing for the soul. Be his difficulties what they may, we can be confident that they would rapidly disappear before the earnest resolve of seeking “first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.” He has but to begin, and presently would he find that obstacles, which appeared insurmountable, are gradually lowered, and that, if he have to encounter all which he dreaded, it is in a strength which grows with the exigence. What we fear for this man, when we know him plied with the remonstrances of conscience, it is not that, if he set himself fearlessly to regulate his conduct by the revealed will of God, he may find that he has not time enough for religion, or that the trials of his station are too great to be surmounted; it is only that he may shield himself behind his confessed disadvantages, and hold himself blameless in not making an attempt, where the likelihood of success seems so slight. We would come down upon him, in his moment of indecision, when conscience is rebuking his neglect of the one thing needful, and when he strives to parry the rebuke, by asking how he can attend to religion whilst the very air which he breathes seems impregnated with wickedness? We will hear nothing of an impossibility. Time may be made, prayer may be offered, the Bible may be read, vice may be forsaken, contempt may be braved, and the Spirit of the living God fails no man who is not false to himself. And if he plead the ungodliness of the family in which he is placed, and maintain it not to be expected that righteousness should be acquired, where there is every thing to fasten down a man to evil, we require of him to go with us in thought to the household of Nero. We tell him of the depravity of that scourge and disgrace of humankind, we describe to him the fierce profligacy which pervaded his court: we show him how it was like rushing into the flames, then and there to embrace christianity: and we leave him to think, if he dare, that any scene, or association, can excuse the neglect of religion, when St. Paul could single out, from the whole mass of Roman christians,  “chiefly them that were Cæsar's household.”


We proceed to what we reckon the most important remarks which we have to offer on the passage which forms our subject of discourse. You will observe that the saints, of whom St. Paul speaks in the text, not only belonged to Cæsar's household at the time of their conversion to christianity, but remained in that household after their conversion. It is evident that they did not feel it their duty to abandon the stations in which Providence had placed them, and seek others apparently more favorable to the growth of religion. And we may conclude that their decision was right, for, having direct intercourse with St. Paul, who could furnish them with rules of conduct derived immediately from God, we cannot doubt that they did what ought to have been done. So that it does not at all follow that a man is to withdraw himself from circumstances of danger and difficulty, and strive to place himself in a condition where there shall be less temptation or opposition. We cannot, indeed, think that a converted man would be justified in seeking employment where he knew that it would be especially difficult to cultivate religion: but we can believe that he might be justified in retaining his employment, supposing him thus placed at the time of conversion. To desert his employment, because it made religion difficult, would be to declare that the grace, which had converted him, in spite of disadvantages, would not suffice to the establishing and perfecting him; and thus would his first step mark a distrust of God’s Spirit, which would augur but ill for his after progress. If an employment were in itself sinful, if it actually could not be carried on without sin, there would be no room for debate; it must be abandoned at once, though utter destitution might seem the inevitable consequence. But if the employment be only dangerous, if it only require a greater measure of circumspection, vigilance, and boldness, the forsaking it may prove timidity rather than prudence; a disposition to evade, rather than to conquer.


We doubt, for example whether a man, roused to the great work of the saving the soul, could lawfully seek to place himself in the midst of the temptations of a court, and surround himself with those hinderances to spiritual religion which too often abound in palaces of princes. But it would all the difference if he were a courtier at the time of his being first made to feel that he had a soul; a court is a lawful, though a dangerous, residence; and it may not only be allowable, it may even be required, that he should continue where he is, and take advantage of his position to adorn and diffuse christianity. It might not look like a saint to seek employment in the household of Cæsar; but it may be the very part of a saint not to withdraw from the household, and descend into humble life. A religious servant might not be justified
in wilfully entering an irreligious family, where he knew that piety would be discountenanced in every possible way; but if he have become religious whilst serving in the irreligious family, it may be lawful for him to remain, nay, it may be unlawful for him to leave: it is lawful for him to remain, if he be not required to act against his conscience; it is unlawful for him to leave, if distinct opportunity be afforded him of doing honor to God, and promoting Christ's cause. And this latter supposition will probably hold good in the majority of cases. When one member of an irreligious household is converted, we regard him as the particle of leaven, placed by God in the midst of an unsound mass; and the circumstances must be very peculiar, which would seem to us to warrant the withdrawment of this particle, so that the mass should be again void of any righteous element.


We have great pleasure in contemplating the moral power with which God has invested the meanest of his people. It is too common to judge power by station, and to compute the influence which a man may exert over others, by the temporal advantages which fall to his lot. But there is a power in religion, irrespective altogether of worldly station: a power which may indeed be used more extensively, if its possessor have command of other forces besides, but which may work the very finest results supposing him to have nothing else to wield. We refer chiefly to the power of a consistent example; and we should confidently say to the religious servant in the irreligious family, that it is hardly possible to overrate the service which he, or she, may render to the cause of christianity. We are not supposing the servant to travel beyond the immediate duties of his station, for it is no recommendation of religion when persons put themselves forward, and assume offices to which they have never been called. We only suppose the servant to carry his christianity in all his occupations, and this will be sure to make him the most respectful, faithful, and diligent in the domestic establishment. He will be quickly distinguished from others by closer attention to his master’s interests, by greater care of his master’s property, by a stricter adherence to truth, and by a more obliging and submissive deportment. It is nothing to tell us that, often, where there is a religious profession, there are few or none of these characteristics; this is only telling us that hypocrisy is confined to no class of life, but may flourish equally in the kitchen and parlor. Let there be real religion, and whatever a man's station, it will show itself in the performance of the duties of that station. The rule admits no exceptions, for religion seats itself in the heart, and thence influences all the actions. Therefore, if there be one, in a mass of irreligious domestics, whom the Spirit of God has brought to repentance and faith, that one will rapidly distinguish himself from rest by superior civility, diligence and honesty.


And it is just because true religion will thus necessarily display itself in the practice, that we ascribe to it a power, in every rank of life, of acting silently upon others, and assimilating them to itself. Let the irreligious master perceive that there is no one in his household so trustworthy as the professed disciple of Christ, no one on whose word he can place such dependence, no one who serves him with equal industry and alacrity; and it can hardly fail but that this master will gradually receive an impression favorable to religion, whatever may have been hitherto his opposition and prejudice. There is something mightily ennobling in this; for the meanest in a household, whose days are consumed in the lowest drudgeries of life, is thus represented as invested with a high power of winning triumphs for christianity, and turning many to righteousness. There may be families to which the preacher of the Gospel can gain no access; they will not come to listen to him on the Sabbath, and would scowl on him as an intruder in the week. And what instrumentality is there, through which to act on such families, barred up, as they are, against both the public and the private ministrations of the word? Nothing would be so hopeful as the instrumentality of pious domestics; and, therefore, God forbid that such domestics should hastily withdraw themselves from the households. We look to the pious servant to do what the minister of the Gospel has no opportunities of doing, to publish and recommend the doctrine of Christ, not by officious interference, and unbecoming reproof, and unasked for advice; but by blamelessness of conduct, by devotedness to duty, by fidelity, by humility, by obligingness. We send that servant as our missionary into the very midst of the inaccessible family; not to deliver messages with his lip, but to deliver them through his life; and we can almost venture to predict, that if he do indeed, according to St. Paul's direction to servants, “adorn the doctrine of God the Savior in all things,” it will gradually come to pass that religion conciliates some measure of respect, that those above him, and around him, inquire into his motives, and perhaps even seek for themselves what works so beautifully in another.


But if we may fairly contend that such an influence as this is wielded by a righteous domestic in an unrighteous family, we can feel no surprise, that, when God had won to himself servants from amongst the servants of Nero, he permitted, and perhaps even commanded, their remaining in the service of the profligate emperor. Who knows whether there may not, at first, have been a solitary convert, one who held but a mean place in the imperial household, and who may have desired to escape at once from a scene where there seemed to be so many by whom he might be injured, so few to whom he could do good? But he may have been admonished to remain; and by the mere force of a consistent deportment, he may have borne down much of the opposition to christianity, till at last, though he prevailed not to the bringing over the bloody emperor himself, he was surrounded by a goodly company of believers, and a church of the Redeemer rose in the very midst of the palace of the Cæsars. And whether or not it were thus, through the influence of a solitary convert, that the religion of Jesus established itself in the most unpromising scene, the great truth remains beyond controversy, that a post is not to be forsaken because it cannot be occupied without peril to personal piety. Let, therefore, any amongst yourselves, who may be disposed to abandon the station in which God has placed them, because of its dangers and trials, consider whether they may not have been thus circumstanced for the very purpose of being useful to others; and whether, then, it does not become them to persist in hope, rather than to desert it in fear. For very difficult would it be to show that any can have more cause to seek a change of service, than men converted from amongst the courtiers and domestics of Nero; and, nevertheless, these christians, with an apostle for their immediate instructor, adhered steadfastly to the employments in which conversion had found them; so that they were to be known by the striking description, “The saints that are of Cæsar's household.”


But we have not yet exhausted the instructive truths which seem fairly deducible from the simple statement of our text. We felt, as we insisted on the last lesson - the lesson as to the duty of remaining in a perilous position - that some might feel as though we required them to injure themselves for the benefit of others; and when it the soul which is at stake, there may be doubts whether a sacrifice such as this can be lawful. We maintained it to be right that Cæsar's household should not be deserted by the saints, because those saints, by remaining there, might be instrumental to the conversion of others to christianity. But, surely, it is a christian's first duty to give heed to his own growth in grace; how then can it be right that, with the vague hope of benefiting others, he should continue amongst hinderances to his own spiritual advancement?


Brethren, of this we may be certain, that, wheresoever God makes it a man's duty, there will he make it his interest to remain. If he employ one of his servants in turning others from sin, he will cause the employment to conduce to that servant's holiness. Is there no indication of this in the words of our text? We lay the emphasis now upon “chiefly,” “chiefly they that are of Cæsar's household.” Of all the Roman christians, the foremost in that love, which is the prime fruit of the Spirit, were those who were found amongst the courtiers and attendants of Nero, and who probably remained in his service for the express purpose of endeavoring to promote the cause of the Gospel. Then it is very evident that these Christians sustained no personal injury, but rather outstripped, in all which should characterize believers, others who might have seemed more advantageously placed.


Neither do we feel any surprise at this: it is just the result for which we might have naturally looked. Is it the absence of temptation, is it the want of trial, which is most favorable to the growth of vital christianity? is it, when there is least to harass a christian, to put him on his guard, or keep him on the alert, that he is most likely to become spiritually great? If so, then men were right in former times, who fancied it most for the interest of the soul that they should absolutely seclude themselves from the world, and, withdrawing to some lonely hermitage, hold communion with no being but God. But this we believe to have been an error. The anchorite, who never mixed with his fellow men, and who was never exposed to the temptations resulting from direct contact with the world, might easily persuade himself of his superior sanctity, and as easily deceive himself. He might suppose his evil passion subdued, his corrupt propensities eradicated, whereas the real state of the case might be, that the evil passions were only quiet because not solicited, and that the propensities were not urged because there was nothing to excite them. Had he been brought away from his hermitage, and again exposed to temptation, it is far from improbable that he, who had won to himself a venerated name by his austerities, and who was presumed to have quite mastered the appetites and desires of an unruly nature, would have yielded to the solicitations with which he found himself beset, and given melancholy proof that the strength of his virtue lay in its not being tried And, at all events, there is good ground for reckoning it an erroneous supposition, that piety must flourish best where least exposed to injury. The household of Cæsar may be a far better place for the growth of personal religion, than the cell of a monk: in the one, the christian has his graces put continually to the proof, and this tends both to the discovering and the strengthening them; in the other, there is comparatively nothing to exercise virtue, and therefore may its very existence be only a delusion.


Why then is the courtier to think, that, by making it his duty to remain in the dangerous atmosphere of a court, we require him to sacrifice himself for the benefit of others? or the servant, that, by bidding him stay in the irreligious family, we doom him to the being hindered in the spiritual race? Far enough from this. Let the remaining be matter of conscience, and the advantageousness shall be matter of experience. “The God of all grace,” who has promised that his people shall not be tempted above that they are able, will bestow assistance proportioned to the wants. The constant exposure to danger will induce constant watchfulness: multiplied difficulties will teach the need of frequent prayer: the beheld wickedness of others will keep alive an earnest desire, that the earth may be “full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.”


And why, then, should not personal piety flourish? why should it be stunted? why, rather, should it not be more than commonly vigorous? Oh, let no man think that he cannot be expected to make great progress in religion, because he is obliged to be much in contact with wickedness, because his calling in life is one of great moral danger, keeping him associated with those who hate good, and employed on what tends to increase worldly mindedness? It will probably be from situations such as this, that God shall gather into the kingdom of heaven the most eminent of his servants. It may not be from cloistered solitudes, where piety had but little to contend with, that the distinguished ones shall advance when Christ distributes the prizes of eternity - it may rather be from the court, where worldliness reigned; from the exchange, where gold was the idol; and from the family, where godliness was held in derision. Not that there may not be exalted piety where there has not been extraordinary trial. But the extraordinary trial, met in God's strength, which is always sufficient, will be almost sure to issue in such prayerfulness, such faith, such vigilance, such devotedness, as can hardly be looked for where there is but little to rouse, to alarm, and to harass. Therefore, let those be of good cheer, who, if pious at all, must be pious in spite of a thousand hinderances and disadvantages. Let these hinderances and disadvantages only make them earnest in prayer and diligent in labor, and they will prove their best helps in working out salvation. Witness the “chiefly” of our text. There were none in Rome, in whom the flame of christian love was so bright, as in those confined to the most polluted of atmospheres. God appointed them their station: they submitted in obedience to his will: and the result was, that the lamp, which you would have thought must have gone out in so pestilential an air, burnt stronger and clearer than in any other scene.


Look, then, upon your enemies as your auxiliaries, upon your dangers as your guardians, upon your difficulties as your helps. Christian men, and christian women, ye of whom God asks most in asking you to be his servants, for you he reserves most, if, indeed, ye be “faithful unto death.” The “chiefly” of the text may be again heard; they who have been first in godliness shall be first in glory: and when Christ is saying, “Come, ye blessed of my Father,” it may be with this addition, “chiefly they that were of Cæsar's household.”